# diabetes_case_study

Diabetes is a chronic medical condition that consists of two disease types with distinct etiology. Additionally, some women during pregnancy develop gestational diabetes which typically subsides postpartum.

Treatment for diabetes beyond lifestyle modifications involves monitoring insulin levels throughout the day and administering insulin when blood sugar exceeds a threshold established by a clinical provider. Hypoglycemia- when blood glucose is too low, may result when too much insulin is taken. This is a lifethreatening condition, often requiring hospitalization, so it is important to take medication as instructed.

During the implementation of the ACA, several policies were enacted to limit government expenditure on healthcare. These interventions targeted the most expensive treatments that could be prevented with better provider management and coordination, including hospitalizations. Should a patient be readmitted to the hospital within 30 days of a prior admission with the same clinical diagnosis, government sponsored insurance would not reimburse for clinical care provided.

One strategy is developing predictive models to understand which patients that were most at risk for critical complications following hospitalization.

We fit a starting model with a simple linear regression with a predictor that is likely highly associated with readmission- time in the hospital. Next we select 8 variables that are likely significant predictors based on clinical knowledge. We use backward selection to fit a final model with all significant variables. Gender is not predictive of readmission, this makes sense because there is limited evidence for variations in psychopathology for diabetes based on gender. Outpatient visits are also not significant, probably in part because access to primary care is associated with both prevention and symptom severity, which cancel each other out in regards to readmission risk. Insulin is highly significant, but change is not in the next model. There is overlap in the concept represented. If patients do not have any change in their medication, they also don’t have an increase in insulin. We keep the latter also because it is more highly related to diabetes management. Our final model predicts readmission based on insulin management, number of emergency visits, time in hospital during the first admission, age, and number of diagnoses, which are all significant. In comparison to a null model, that none of these variables are significant predictors of readmission, can be rejected based on the chi squared value.
